Given a dataset to use in algorithm development,
it's critical that you understand how much data to use when training
your algorithm and how much to leave held out for post-training validation.
It's also very important to curate your training
and validation data in a way that is appropriate to
your clinical application as this will have
a direct effect on how the algorithm is cleared to be used clinically.
In the world of medical imaging algorithm development,
you'll often be given a dataset that looks like
this and you'll need to turn it into something that looks more like this.
We did a bit of this in lesson 2 and we talked about how to extract
metadata about a dataset from the DICOM header and other sources.
But there are some steps we need to take after that to prepare us for deep learning.
Before feeding your data into a deep learning model,
you'll need to split it into two sets.
A training set, which is data that your deep learning algorithm will use to
learn the features that differentiate between your classes and a validation set.
Your algorithm will never use this set for learning.
This is the set that you will use to determine if
your algorithm is actually learning to discriminate between your classes.
We want to maximize the data that our algorithm sees to learn features,
while also leaving enough validation held out
so that we can confidently determine the algorithm's performance.
The general rule of thumb is to split your data 80, 20.
The data should be split to maximize for prevalence of positive cases.
In other words, make sure that 80 per cent of your positive cases end
up in the training set and 20 per cent end up in the validation set.
Note that an image should never be used for both training and validation.
The properties of your training and validation set also differ.
When we train an algorithm,
we want the model architecture to see equal numbers of
cases that belong to each class that we're teaching it to distinguish between.
Even if one class is really rare in the wild,
we want the model to be able to recognize that just
as well as I can recognize the common classes.
For all other variables in your dataset,
such as age, sex,
and race, your training set should follow
the same distribution as your original file dataset.
So if your original dataset contained individuals banding from ages 10 to 80,
your training search should also have this full age range.
Usually however, classification tasks that we are presented
with in the real world do not offer balanced classes.
For example, if you're creating an algorithm to
classify the presence or absence of a rare disease,
most of your real-world scans will be negative cases.
To this end, when we validate our model,
we want our model to see a class imbalance that reflects the real-world.
More on the statistics behind this later.
Same with the training set,
make sure that all of your other variables are
distributed the same way that they were in the original dataset.
Let's go through an example together of splitting a dataset.
Here, we have a dataset that has 100 samples in it,
30 of which are positive, shown in green.
The first step would be to split our data 80,
20 using the positive class as the feature to split on.
In other words, we want to make sure 80 per cent of
the positive cases are in the training set and 20 per cent in the validation.
Here we end up with 24 positive cases in
our training set and six positive cases in our validation.
See here that our training set though is not balanced for positive and negative.
So our model will see way more negative classes when learning,
which is not what we want.
The next step then would be to discard
negative training cases so that our training set is balanced.
When you do this, make sure that your negative cases are still
distributed across the population and randomization can help with this.
Keras provides a really great tool for
doing this training and validation split automatically.
They've developed a package called train test split.
It allows you to split with a certain percentage.
So here, 20 per cent going into our validation set.
It also allows you to choose
what class you're splitting on so that you know you're getting
20 percent of positive cases in your validation set and 80 per cent in the training set,
not just splitting the data into two random 80, 20 chunks.